From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
[Music]
The Supreme Court began a new term this
week. One where the justices will weigh
in on issues of presidential power and
on the most consequential culture war
battles in America.
In one of the first cases, the court
considered whether to strike down a ban
on conversion therapy. The controversial
practice aimed at changing someone's
sexual orientation.
Today, my colleague Ann Marimow walks us
through that case.
It's Thursday, October 9th.
[Music]
Ann, welcome to The Daily. First time on
the show as our new Supreme Court
correspondent. Thank you. Really happy
to be here. I'm really excited to talk
to you because we are at the start of a
new Supreme Court term and it's one I
think a lot of us have been anticipating
and waiting for because the court is
going to be ruling on a number of big
questions. We know that there are big
questions related to the Trump
administration among all these other
cases on the docket. So,
I want to ask how you weigh the
importance of the cases that are before
the court right now.
Yeah, so as you said, it's a huge term.
The Trump administration's agenda is
really going to dominate a lot of the
docket. Already we have in November the
case about Trump's sweeping tariffs.
They're going to look at whether the
president has the power to fire
independent government regulators who
are supposed to be protected by
Congress. And then in January, they're
going to look at does the president have
the authority to fire a governor of the
independent Federal Reserve Board.
Right. So, some pretty big questions
about what Trump can and can't do.
Exactly. But there are also all of these
other cases that will have critical
impact on the lives of Americans that
are as important and that we're also
watching this term. The court's going to
look at the rights of transgender
athletes to participate in girls and
women's sports, the religious rights of
prisoners Mhm. And the court wasted no
time in its first week back on the bench
turning to one of these big culture war
issues and taking up the issue of
whether or not states can ban conversion
therapy for minors. Okay, so tell me
about this case that we saw this week
because I think for a lot of us that are
on the sidelines here, it seemed as
though this case had kind of revived an
issue that had been discredited a long
time ago, conversion therapy. It's
something that feels a little like it's
from another era and now it's before the
court. That's right. So, starting in
about the 1990s, major medical
associations had come to this consensus
that counseling that aimed to change the
sexual orientation of gay teenagers or
gender identity of transgender teens was
really viewed as harmful and widely
rejected. A lot of state legislators
started to pass laws between 2012 and
2024 to place restrictions on this type
of therapy for minors. So, this case
arose out of Colorado, which is one of
more than 20 states with these similar
laws. And what exactly did these laws
say broadly speaking? Yes, so Colorado's
law and the laws like it basically say
that any practice or treatment that
tries to change a minor's gender
expression or eliminate their
attractions to people of the same sex
are ineffective and harmful and cannot
be practiced in those states. And so,
tell me about the challenge to that law
in Colorado. What's the case there? So,
Colorado's law was passed back in 2019.
This lawsuit was not filed until 2022 by
Kaylee Chiles. She practices in a small
bungalow office in Colorado Springs
downtown right near Colorado College.
She said that she wants to have
voluntary conversations with young
people who want to try to live a life
consistent with their faith. She gets
some referrals through churches and she
says that Colorado's law is interfering
with those conversations and violation
of her free speech rights. And just to
be clear, has she actually gotten in
trouble for doing this?
No, Colorado's law has never been
enforced against anyone. Um it includes
fines of up to $5,000. Therapists can
lose their licenses, but she has never
been prosecuted for this or charged, but
she says that her speech is being
chilled because she's concerned about
crossing that line. And so, she's being
represented by a real powerhouse at the
Supreme Court. This is the Alliance
Defending Freedom, an Arizona-based
Christian conservative law firm and
advocacy group that's been behind a lot
of cases at the court in recent years.
In 2018, the court ruled in favor of one
of their clients, Jack Phillips, who is
a baker in Colorado who had refused to
make a wedding cake for a gay couple.
And then in 2023, the justices also
sided with ADF on another case from
Colorado. This was a web designer who
had refused to make wedding websites for
same-sex couples. And in each of these
cases, these are individuals saying that
their First Amendment rights are being
violated.
Yes, just like Chiles in the conversion
therapy case. Okay. So, walk us through
the oral arguments in this case
involving Chiles. I I also listened to
them, but what stood out to you about
how the arguments unfolded? We will hear
argument first this morning in case
24-539,
Chiles versus Salazar. Mr. Campbell.
Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the court. So, the argument began
with the lawyer from Alliance Defending
Freedom representing the therapist.
Colorado forbids counselors like Kaylee
Chiles from helping minors pursue
state-disfavored goals on issues of
gender and sexuality.
>> He said Colorado can't turn this
therapist into what he said is a
mouthpiece for the government by forcing
her to have the types of conversations
the state thinks are appropriate.
>> should not manipulate private
conversations between licensed
professionals and clients. He said over
and over again that the state is
censoring her speech, violating her
ability to work with patients who come
to her voluntarily to get the type of
treatment they need. because the First
Amendment depends on the difference
between speech and conduct, not on the
difference So, the therapist's lawyer
tried to make a really clear distinction
between the voluntary talk therapy that
she wants to practice and traditional
conduct, doctors administering pills or
delivering some sort of specific medical
treatment.
>> if we were in the medical context and
there was something like administering
drugs, performing procedures, conducting
examinations, that would take it outside
of the arguments we're making
Got it. So, in this lawyer's view, what
he's saying is there's a difference
between being a doctor and handing
someone pills and being a therapist and
just talking to a patient. Exactly. And
that's a key distinction because the
First Amendment protects speech and the
government can't infringe on the speech
of individuals and the court has said
that professionals don't lose that right
to free speech just because they're
operating in the professional context.
Hm. So, if the court determines that
this is just aimed at speech, then the
state can't regulate that in a way that
discriminates based on viewpoint in
contrast to states having the power to
regulate medical practice to ensure
patients are protected from substandard
care. So, let's talk about how the
justices respond to that argument. What
did you hear there? I thought the most
pushback on the therapist's lawyer came
from two of the liberal justices,
Justice Sonia Sotomayor and Justice
Ketanji Brown Jackson. I guess it seems
very odd that you could have two
scenarios where you have two licensed
professionals both
attempting to provide treatment to an
individual, say for the same issue that,
you know, the person says, I'd like to
live consistently with my biological
sex. I feel that I I'm not doing that.
I'd like your help.
Medical professional A
treats that   condition
with medication.
Medical professional B treats that
condition with talk therapy. Justice
Jackson in particular said she was
having trouble distinguishing speech as
a tool here to deliver the therapy and
said what's the difference between that
kind of tool and other tools doctors
use. And I guess under your theory,
those two
scenarios are sufficiently different
from a constitutional perspective that
one could be allowed and the other not.
I think that's potentially correct
because the First Amendment would apply
to the speech
>> Just because words are being used to
accomplish the therapy in one scenario
and not the other. No, because only
words are being used in the one
scenario. Again, if there is a
combination of words and conduct, I
think that takes us into a different
into a different realm.
What she's saying here is kind of like,
are you really arguing that therapists
aren't healthcare professionals? Is that
the claim you're trying to make that the
therapy itself isn't, you know, in and
of itself a medical intervention?
I'm wondering why this regulation at
issue here isn't really just the
functional equivalent of Scruggs v.
Stuart. And she brought up that just a
few months ago, the court's conservative
majority upheld a Tennessee law barring
certain medical treatments for
transgender young people that the state
had deemed unsafe. And she really
pressed the question of how is it
possible for us to say those types of
laws are okay, but in this case Colorado
can't ban conversion therapy that it
thinks is harmful. Well, from a very
broad perspective, there shouldn't be
equivalence because obviously we have a
First Amendment. So, when you're talking
>> Because talk The key difference, he
says, is that Tennessee's law was
dealing with medication, with drugs.
Colorado's law is dealing with the First
Amendment and those speech concerns. So,
two different constitutional principles
at play.
You know, it seems plausible to me that
legally these two things might be
treated distinctly. I mean, counseling
obviously can be a hugely important
intervention that has a big impact on
someone's mental health, but it seems
plausible that it would be seen
differently than taking medication or
doing an operation. And you can see a
slippery slope kind of concern here,
where if you start, you know, regulating
the things that therapists say to their
patient, there could be a lot of
problems down the line. Right. And the
lawyer for the therapist said, Yeah,
that would allow states to silence all
kinds of speech in the counseling room.
Allowing Colorado to bar this type of
treatment would open the door to laws
barring discussion of other things like
divorce or abortion. Here, Colorado
can't satisfy any level of heightened
scrutiny. So, the free speech aspect of
the debate was a big part of the
argument on Tuesday. And if the court
decides that this type of law is
infringing on free speech, it could send
it back to the lower courts. And then
the key test will be for the state to
justify its law and say the harm that
comes from conversion therapy justifies
this infringement on speech and that the
law is designed narrowly enough to make
it worthwhile. And Colorado can't prove
harm because it hasn't cited a study
focusing on what's at issue here,
voluntary speech between a licensed
professional and a minor. So, with this
in mind, the petitioner's lawyer then
turns to the question of harm. Colorado
certainly cites studies, but those
studies suffer from significant flaws.
The main The therapist's lawyer said the
studies are weak and biased.
>> They treat voluntary conversations the
same as shock therapy. He said that the
studies that Colorado is relying on
don't address the type of voluntary talk
therapy that she wants to provide. And
he said there's no evidence specifically
about this type of therapy that it's
harmful. She should be able to practice
it with her clients. And just to ask, is
that true? There are certainly people,
right, who have said this kind of
therapy ruined their lives or caused
severe trauma. Well, major medical
associations like the American Medical
Association, the American Psychological
Association, still say that this is
harmful, that conversations that try to
change what they say is somebody's
innate identity or sexual orientation
are harmful to young people. But there
is an emerging debate, especially around
gender identity, where therapists are
reconsidering the possible benefits of
this type of therapy.
Thank you, counsel. Justice Thomas.
Just to summarize, the lawyers for the
therapist have basically said, "Look,
this case turns on this key issue of
whether this kind of therapy is speech
or medical care. And we say it's speech.
But even if you don't buy our argument
that it's speech, even if you think it's
medical care, well, there's not enough
evidence to say that the medical care is
harmful, that this is causing harm."
Right. And despite some tough questions
from Justice Sotomayor and Justice
Jackson, most of the court seemed pretty
receptive to the therapist's lawyers'
claims. Some of them didn't even ask
questions like Justice Brett Kavanaugh.
But then it was time for Colorado's
lawyer to stand up and try to make her
case and to try to convince them
otherwise.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
So, the Colorado lawyer steps up, as you
said, to make her case to these justices
who had overall been quite receptive to
the therapist's argument. Walk us
through what that lawyer said. Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the court.
Yes, it's two-pronged. This is the
Solicitor General of Colorado.
Throughout its history, this court has
recognized that state power is at its
apex when it regulates to ensure safety
in the healthcare professions.
Colorado's law lies at the bull's-eye
center of this protection. She says
fundamentally this is not speech. A
state cannot lose its power to regulate
the very professionals that it licenses
just because they are using words. These
are licensed providers. It's conduct,
it's treatment, it's a clinical
conversation. And a state cannot be
required to let its vulnerable young
people waste their time and money on an
ineffective, harmful treatment just
because that treatment is delivered
through words. And then she says there
is real harm. There's lots of evidence
from these major medical associations.
The harms from conversion therapy come
from when you tell a young person, "You
can change this innate thing about
yourself." And they try and they try and
they fail and then they have shame and
they're miserable and then it ruins your
She's basically disagreeing with the two
main things that the therapist's lawyer
said. She says, "This isn't speech, it's
medical care. And by the way, it does
cause harm." Right. And she says that's
why so many other states have also
passed laws barring conversion therapy.
And walk us through how the justices
respond to that because it sounds like
she's just saying the inverse of what
they heard. Right.
>> If petitioner were a non-therapist,
would this be protected speech?
Um well, so I wanted to mention
>> So, Justice Thomas said, "Well, what
about other people who aren't licensed
therapists? Are they allowed to practice
conversion therapy?" But the law exempts
religious ministers and ministries from
this. And there was also a group of
people called life coaches who could
perform this therapy. And in response,
the lawyer from Colorado says this law
is narrow. She says that there's an
exemption for religious ministries,
they're not trying to violate anybody's
free speech rights, that this is
specifically about somebody who has a
license from the state and that they get
to set the standard for what that
practice looks like. So, what if someone
who was there happened to be devoutly
religious and actually relied more on
the minister than the therapist?
It seemed that that person would be
equally dangerous. He asked, "What about
religious ministries and life coaches?
If this is such a dangerous practice,
why is it not banned for those types of
individuals?"
Well, I think that that would be a
personal choice that they were making to
rely on their religious minister. It
wouldn't be a representation from the
state. If you go to a life coach or you
go with someone else, they're not
licensed by the state. You're not
expecting them to be complying with
standards of care. You have a different
expectation. You know, I found this
exchange really interesting because on
the one hand, the lawyer for Colorado
makes the law seem narrow in the sense
that the harm of this to people who want
to seek out this kind of conversion
therapy is actually limited because they
can get it if they want it, just not
from a therapist. But on the other hand,
the justices still have to deal with
that fundamental question of whether it
infringes on the speech of the people it
does apply to. Right. And that's what we
heard from some of the other justices
who questioned Colorado's lawyer. I
don't really see a a difference between
the argument that you're making now and
the argument that I thought we rejected
in the Neff law. So, Justice Alito had
very pointed questions for the Colorado
attorney. Let me put that aside and ask
about your
interpretation
of the statute.
>> did that by using a hypothetical.
Suppose an adolescent male comes to a
licensed therapist and says he's
attracted
to other males, but feels uneasy and
guilty about those feelings, and he
wants the therapist's help so he will
feel comfortable. He said if
a young person comes to a doctor and
says that I identify as gay, the law
allows the therapist to help that person
affirm their sexual orientation.
But
The other situation is
similar. An adolescent male comes to a
licensed therapist, says he's attracted
to other males, and he wants to end or
lessen them and asks for the therapist's
help in doing so. If a different
teenager comes to a doctor and says I
identify as gay, the doctor is not
allowed to help that teenager try to
become straight. It seems to me your
statute dictates opposite results in
those two situations based on
the view based on the viewpoint
expressed. One viewpoint
>> So, the law allows you to counsel in one
direction, but not the other. And
Justice Alito seemed to be making the
point that this is sort of a classic
type of law that the First Amendment
prohibits. Basically, Alito's point here
is the therapist in this case can tell a
patient to lean into their gay identity,
but can't tell them to change it. And
that's discriminating based on the point
of view of the speech in question, which
the government can't do. Right. When the
government does that, it's very suspect
and may be in violation of the First
Amendment. And that led to one of the
most surprising and really telling
moments of the argument. I I guess I had
the same kind of question that Justice
Alito had. I mean, if we assume for
example Liberal Justice Elena Kagan kind
of leaned into Justice Alito's question
and said, you know, I have the same
question. If a doctor says, I know you
identify as gay and I'm going to help
you accept that. And another doctor
says, I know you identify as gay
and I'm going to help you to change
that. And one of those is permissible
and the other is not. That seems like
viewpoint discrimination in the way we
would normally understand viewpoint
discrimination.
>> And it does seem like a classic example
of discrimination by government
officials based on the viewpoint being
expressed. Um that would normally be
subject to a high level of judicial
review. And in response to Justice
Kagan, Colorado's lawyer says I don't
disagree with that, Justice Kagan, and
that's why medical treatment has to be
treated differently. You're right. Um we
are picking sides in this debate because
one type of treatment is harmful and
that's why speech is different from
treatment. Um the state is trying to
protect young people from a harmful
practice. And so we are saying that
you're not allowed to practice
conversion therapy. Um that's by design.
And what about the Colorado lawyer's
argument that this care does cause harm?
How do the justices deal with that?
Right. So there was another pointed
question from Justice Amy Coney Barrett,
who is often the swing vote in in the
majority. Justice Barrett What is your
best evidence on this record that this
kind of talk therapy by a licensed
professional licensed therapist to
minors causes harm? Sure, I would direct
you to
>> said, you know, what is your best answer
to how this actually causes harm? The
Green study looked at 34,000 13 to 25
year olds who had gone through
conversion therapy and after controlling
for other factors found there was a two
times rate of attempted suicides among
that group. The Colorado lawyer again
pointed to major medical associations
and studies over many years. He looked
specifically at childhood exposure and
found association with adverse mental
health outcomes in adulthood. Saying
that this can lead to increased risk for
depression and suicide and said there's
real harm here for young people. Justice
Alito
Your argument depends very heavily on
the standard of care, which I take it is
defined by the medical cons by medical
consensus. Is that correct?
>> And even as she's talking about um all
these studies, there is skepticism um
from conservative justices like Samuel
Alito. But have there been times when
the medical consensus has been
politicized, has been
taken over by ideology?
Who asked pointedly, can medical
consensus be wrong? Was there once Was
there a time when many medical
professionals
thought that certain people should not
be permitted to procreate because they
had low IQs? So he brings up a time in
the 1920s when medical professionals
thought that certain people uh should
not be permitted to procreate. Um
we have no facts about that in this
case, but I I wouldn't disagree that
that's possible. And I think it's a
really
>> Isn't it a fact that it's happened in
the past? And he quotes from the court's
majority opinion back in 1927, which
upheld that sterilization program
written by Justice Oliver Wendell
Holmes, who said I think that
>> generations of idiots are enough.
Wasn't it better for all the world
because three generations of imbeciles
are enough?
He's saying, look, scientific consensus
has been wrong before. That suggests it
could be wrong again and we shouldn't
rest our law on that. Right. And Justice
Gorsuch makes the same point that
medical consensus in the 1970s said that
homosexuality was a mental illness. What
if a state back then
passed a law prohibiting talk therapy
that affirmed homosexuality? Would that
be subject to It's interesting because
the things that they're pointing to are
really horrifying moments in our legal
and scientific history. I mean,
do you think that this line of
questioning from the conservatives
suggests that the justices that the
court doesn't trust scientific consensus
anymore? Well, I think Justice Alito was
pretty clear that medical consensus can
be very important. He says it's usually
very reasonable, but he did point out
there have been times when medical
consensus has been politicized or
colored by ideology. I do think it's
interesting that we're in this moment
again where the court is dealing with
this intersection of the law and
science. Um we saw this last term when
they took on the case involving
gender-affirming care for minors in
Tennessee. Um and I think that it is
going to keep coming back to the court
and it's something that they need to
wrestle with.
Thank you, counsel. The case is
submitted.
Okay. So given how these oral arguments
played out this week, what do you think
is going to happen in this case? I saw
two paths emerging from the argument.
One, the court could decide to send this
back to the lower court and say, you got
it wrong the first time. This is
infringing on free speech and you have
to apply a higher level of scrutiny to
the law and see if it's really
justified. The other would be the court
just saying that it's unconstitutional
and striking it down on its own. I mean,
I think part of the equation will be
does Justice Kagan or even one of the
other liberals join with the majority?
Um in that case, I could see them
sending it back to the lower court. And
from the way that you've described these
arguments, it does seem clear that this
case is actually very nuanced and there
were plenty of issues with the law that
could be debated on their legal merits.
And yet because of the nature of the
case, the politicized moment that we're
in and in the court's recent history of
ruling in favor of a bunch of
conservative causes,
it doesn't seem like a stretch to say
that this will be perceived as the court
again pushing forward the conservative
culture war agenda.
Both sides I could see interpreting it
that way. And I wonder if you see a
world in which conservative legal
activists jump on this to push the shift
in the legal landscape even further in
the direction they want. I think it
depends on how the court ends up ruling.
I mean, if it's a 6-3 decision divided
along ideological lines, that's
certainly a a real signal there. If one
of the liberal justices does join and we
get a narrower decision, that would, you
know, show that the court is not as
ideologically divided, but certainly it
fits into the pattern of what we've seen
from this court in recent years.
It was just 5 years ago that the court
actually expanded rights for gay and
transgender workers, but ever since then
they've been slowly moving in this other
direction as we've talked about. Uh the
case involving trans care for minors.
There's another case last term where the
justices said religious families could
pull their children from story time in
public schools that used books with
LGBTQ-themed
characters. And there's questions about
whether it could go even further. Will
there be a reopening of the gay marriage
case? Wow. So we're seeing the justices
continuously not shy away from these big
culture war issues.
And I'm going to be looking to see how
they respond to these cases from
conservative activists that have the
potential to reshape the country.
[Music]
Ann, thanks so much. Thank you.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Here's what else you need to know today.
Israel and Hamas have reached an
agreement for the release of Israeli
hostages in exchange for Palestinian
prisoners. A breakthrough that could be
a crucial step toward an end to the
two-year war in Gaza.
President Trump, who helped broker the
deal, said on social media on Wednesday
that both sides had agreed to the first
phase of the White House's peace plan.
He said all Israeli hostages would be
released and that Israel would pull back
its troops to an agreed-upon line. The
world has come together around this
deal.
And that's something I would say that
without that
uh wouldn't happen. In an interview on
Fox News Wednesday night, Trump said the
hostages would probably be returned on
Monday and said the deal would bring
peace to the whole region. You know,
many years they talked about peace in
the Middle East. This is more than Gaza.
This is peace in the Middle East and
it's been incredible thing.
But many of the specifics of the
agreement remained unclear.
Trump's announcement came at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern on Wednesday night, 2:00 a.m.
Thursday in Israel.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said
that he had spoken with Trump and would
convene his government on Thursday to
sign off on the agreement. But Israel's
initial statements didn't mention a
troop withdrawal.
Hamas said in a statement that the
agreement would lead to the end of the
war in Gaza and Israel's withdrawal from
the territory.
And earlier on Wednesday, President
Trump said that Governor J.B. Pritzker
of Illinois and Mayor Brandon Johnson of
Chicago should be jailed, writing on
social media that they hadn't done
enough to protect ICE officers.
Both Democrats have opposed Trump's
deployment of National Guard troops in
the Chicago area and criticized the
administration's aggressive immigration
raids.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Olivia
Nat, Diana Wynn, and Rochelle Banja. It
was edited by Rob Zipko, Devin Taylor,
and MJ Davis Lynn with help from Paige
Cowett. Contains music by Marion Lozano
and was engineered by Chris Wood.
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Ketroef. See you tomorrow.